*The Psychotropic & Behavioural Effects of Lamiaceae Lavandula*
================================================================

-   Introduction
-   Genus Lavandula
    -   Historical & Medicinal Use
-   Behavioural Animal Research
    -   Early
    -   Recent
    -   Future
    -   Summary
-   Human Studies
    -   Psychological Factors
    -   Brain Patterns
    -   Clinical Applications
-   Pharmacological Mechanisms
    -   Amygdala
    -   Gamma-Aminobutyric Acid (GABA)
    -   Glutamate
    -   Future Pharmacological Research
-   Conclusion
-   References


Introduction
============

The first section of this review begins with brief consideration of the historical context of lavender, with reference to past uses and beliefs. The second section is an extensive evaluation of old and recent animal research, concluding with future animal study directions. This provides a grounding for the third section on direct human studies. This addresses general psychological properties, brain activity and clinical applications. The fourth section discusses the psychological mechanism supporting the psychotropic and behavioural observations in the above historical, animal and human contexts. The author finishes by offering several conclusions relating to the current strength of research in the separate areas and as a whole.

Genus Lavandula
===============

The genus Lavandula of the Lamiaceae family includes up to 30 different species. Lavandula angustifolia (L. angustifolia) is the dominant species today, the essential oil used in perfumes, cosmetics, and purportedly for psychological calming properties. The latter attribute accounts for the resurgence of lavender products today, being a relaxing agent crucial in aromatherapy. Select lavender species retain these properties from their composition of linalool and linalyl acetate. The concentrations of these active constituents are highly variable, depending on taxonomic classification and subject to growing conditions. Some studies does not specify the source of their oil, leaving constituent concentrations unknown and serving as an obstacle to consistent research. Within this review, studies not detailing the species implemented are therefore labelled collectively as lavender. Nevertheless, the mild calming and sedatory properties of lavender are accepted by aromatherapists (Tisserand, 1993), even if that in itself is worthy of question (Nelson, 1997).

Historical & Medicinal Use
----------------------------

The current role of lavender in Western society is that of perfumery, cosmetics, food flavouring and aromatherapy. Prior to this, it had an extensive history of medicinal and hedonic use for both physical and psychological ailments. Early recording of use as a psychological modifier was a religious role in treating evil spirits, under Hildegard von Bingen (1098-1179). Later appearances better reflected current use, with a wellbeing role under Nicholas Culpepper (1616-1654) to alleviate grief and emotional upset. The Victorian era (1837-1901) corroborates this, with medical usage by doctors of L. angustifolia as a calming agent. This medical acceptance instigated general community usage of many different Lavandula species, with variations between species becoming a methodological concern in many subsequent experimental designs.

L. angustifolia or 'true sweet lavender' is the dominant species, appearing in medieval and Victorian eras. Lavender flowers, spirits and oils scented bedchambers and linen to aid sleep. Direct inhalation of lavender from a handkerchief served as an everyday calming method. Handkerchief mediated inhalation is common in these anecdotal accounts, and although being unverified they do suggest that lavender was accepted as maintaining anxiolytic qualities.

These historical accounts are a rationale for modern research into the psychotropic properties of lavender, especially as an anxiolytic. In addition to ancient references and Victorian medicinal applications, literature and old plays mention lavender for psychological conditions. It appeared in Hamlet (1601), ostensibly for nervous headaches. These references to lavender partially support headache relief and calming qualities, and with such an extensive range of noted uses, this review covers only psychological properties. This historical presence supported research into the psychotropic and behaviour effects of lavender, circulating throughout animal and human models, along with pharmacological research.

Behavioural Animal Research
===========================

In assessing the behavioural and pharmacological effects of lavender, animal research has proven invaluable. In terms of psychological effects, the more complex behavioural studies and designs are most generalisable to humans. Although supported by the extensive base of pharmacological research, there are an insufficient number of these studies for empirically sound conclusions. Experimentation on animals identified the underlying biological and pharmacological mechanisms, and while the two areas overlap, they differ on generalisability and application.

Early
-----

Initial experimentation on the psychological properties of lavender began with animals in maze designs and measures of motility. These early methodologies did not sufficiently operationalise the pertinent emotions, with sedation being the focus prior to more complex mood states, such as anxiety. Challenges in generalising animal behaviour to human emotional constructs stimulated further research, along with a paucity of knowledge as to the underlying psychopharmacological mechanisms of lavender. New designs ameliorated the research whereby it gradually countered empirical shortcomings.

Since the early eighteenth century, researchers studied lavender through animal designs. Macht and Ting (1921) conducted the first empirical study, exposing maze-trained rats to tincture of lavender odour. Restricted to only three rats, conclusions were limited despite the odour having an influence on all test subjects. The study demonstrated that lavender doubles maze run time and instigated travel errors in two of the three rats. Attributing the apparent sedation to direct stimulation of olfactory sense organs, later research superseded this interpretation. Through oral administration, Delaveau, Guillemain, Narcisse, and Rousseau (1989) reduced rat responses to electrical stimulation, but the conclusion that this suggests an anxiolytic effect cannot be separated from sedation or analgesia. Nevertheless, by replicating sedatory effects through oral administration without olfaction, they demonstrated the potential for pharmacological mechanisms. This findings are congruent with the historical uses of lavender, reflected both inhalation and oral consumption.

To evaluate the traditional usage of lavender, it was necessary for research to address the pharmacological dynamic via an inhaled medium. Buchbauer, Jirovetz, Jager, et al. (1991) refined the testing methods through an activity box design, effectively demonstrating sedation through decreased motility from lavender vapour. This was supported in other research (Jager, Buchbauer, Jirovetz, & Fritzer, 1992). In a further study, pre-treatment with caffeine increased motility, and when exposed to the lavender vapour demonstrated significantly larger reductions in rat motility similar to subjects that were not caffeinated (Buchbauer, Jirovetz, Jager, Plank, & Dietrich, 1993). Apart from demonstrating the effectiveness of inhaled lavender, researchers interpreted results as being pharmacological in origin. Post-exposure biochemical analysis revealed the presence of the lavender constituents in rat cortex and blood plasma, this research playing a significant role in subsequent pharmacological study. While the sedatory properties of lavender appear well supported, extending it to anxiolysis is not, especially within traditional animal designs.

The sporadic results of older research are due to both a paucity of knowledge about lavender constituents, and the variation in these constituents subject to species. To ameliorate these shortcomings, pre-experimental component analysis of the oil used is necessary for uniform results across studies (Shellie, Mondello, Marriott, & Dugo, 2002). Detailed Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) data of the lavender oil has allowed greater consistency across research, quickly becoming a significant advantage of modern studies. By detailing oil composition and structuring tests around active components common to all species, the particular species used is less relevant. Species like L. angustifolia (Shaw, Annett, Doherty, & Leslie, in press; Bradley, Starkey, Brown, & Lea, in press), L. Officinalis (Umezu et al., 2006), and L. Grosso (Barocelli et al., 2004) all maintain similar constituents, primarily linalool and linalyl acetate. However, this does not guarantee the composition of oil in past research. Certain species maintain an entirely different composition, such as L. Latifolia for instance, which has very little linalyl acetate and is more camphoraceous than other species (Boelens, 1995). Therefore, the composition of the lavender oil used is crucial for consistent research.

Recent
------

By improving research models and designs, animal behaviours can be better generalised to human emotional constructs. Maze and activity box designs were incapable of validly measuring complex mood states. Modern designs superseded older ones, as they are better equipped to assess the more complex and pertinent mood states, such as anxiety. These included the elevated plus-maze (EPM), the open field test (OFT), and the Geller and Vogel conflict tests. Current research incorporates lavender constituent analysis, accompanied by GC-MS confirmation of those constituents. This has markedly improved consistency across research, elucidating plant species differences and permitting individual testing of identifiable constituents.

The EPM is a well-recognised design for assessing anxiety in rodents. Older studies used the EPM for lavender, despite wide use as a test of anxiolytic drugs, and accuracy in distinguishing anxiolysis from locomotor sedation (Cruz, Frei, & Graeff, 1994). Guillemain, Rousseau, and Delaveau (1989) employed the EPM with mice using oral administration, attempting to isolate the anxiolytic properties of lavender through the anxiety focussed modality of the EPM. The high yield of data from this design showed sedation but not anxiolysis. Similar research was limited until recently, with Bradley, Starkey, Brown, and Lea (in press) finding anxiolytic properties with L. angustifolia exposure in both acute 24-hour exposure and chronic 2-week exposure. Both conditions significantly reduced anxiety, particularly chronic exposure, which had comparable effects to diazepam.

Bradley et al. (2007) suggests the lack of significant results from Guillemain et al. (1989) were due to oral administration. As the rat metabolism pharmacologically modifies lavender, Bradley et al. circumvented it through using only inhalation. This mechanism gave constituents direct access to the blood stream and brain. Additionally, Bradley used the Mongolian gerbil over mice, the higher resemblance to human neuro-endocrinological systems enhancing generalisability. However, Bradley et al. did not question the calibre of lavender used in Guillemain. Including GC-MS details verifying the lavender sample is common in recent research, minimising the importance of species differences between studies. Researchers cannot verify the Guillemain sample, violating a foundation of the methodology and impeding comparison between old and new research. Although Bradley is the only EPM research directly focussed on lavender, Komiya, Takeuchi, and Harada (2006) included it for comparison in assessing the properties of inhaled lemon oil, rose oil and ethanol in mice. Notwithstanding the absence of formal statistical analysis, lavender oil subjects spent the least amount of time in the open arms of the EPM and had the lowest number of arm entries. However, those arm entries were equivalent to rose oil and superior to ethanol and control as the second highest for choosing open arms. Selecting well lit open arms over dark enclosed arms suggests an anxiety reducing effect. However, the low level of total arm entries and time spent in the open arms suggest an accompanying sedatory effect. To a limited degree, this reflects Guillemain. As Komiya et al. validated the oil sample and used a vapour exposure system, animal species differences may be more relevant to explaining the significant Bradley EPM results.

Komiya et al. (2006) provided EPM results for comparison as previously noted, but also includes OFT data. Although lavender was not the primary focus of the study, and thus was not statistically analysed, these descriptive data still have comparative value. Shaw et al. (in press) conducted an OFT study on L.angustifolia odour, finding significant reductions in peripheral movement and mobility. The Komiya descriptive statistics share similar trends, lavender decreasing locomotor activity more than other comparison oils except for lemon oil. These results also contribute to the literature in adding a pre-treatment condition, where a 30 minute exposure produced significant results. Shaw et al. concluded that the decreases observed in peripheral movement and mobility, which are escape seeking behaviours, show both a sedative and anxiolytic effect. The authors emphasise that this supports the dose-dependent nature of lavender induced anxiolysis, particularly in reference to the underlying pharmacological relationships of the active constituents, with the support of past research (Buchbauer, et al., 1993; Jirovetz, Jager, Buchbauer, Nikiforov, & Raverdino, 1991).

Shaw et al. (in press) highlighted the importance of dose and length of exposure for anxiolysis, while avoiding sedation. Original studies did not consider this. Delaveau et al. (1989) found the measurement of anxiety was confounded by sedation. Similarly, newfound analgesic effects of lavender account for previous findings of tolerance to electrical stimulation. The tolerance to the pain of electrical stimulation, previously attributed to decreased anxiety, was actually due to analgesic pain reduction. Barocelli et al. (2004) more recently supported the dose dependent nature of anxiolysis and sedation. Using low doses of linalool and linalyl acetate rich L. Grosso, they found no decreases in locomotor activity for both oral and inhalation designs. In addition, they found that both oral and inhaled administration of lavender oil could produce antinociceptive effects. There was a significant decrease in pain writhing behaviour after both acetic acid injection and hot plate exposure, despite lower than average lavender dosage and vapour concentration. Earlier research supports this (Peana et al., 2003), and as these analgesic benefits manifest from low doses, the original electrical stimulation design by Delaveau is inappropriate for measuring anxiolysis. The apparent sedatory confound is considered in modern research. For instance, the locomotor test mentioned before was included in Barocelli et al. (2004) primarily to ensure dosage was sufficient to induce antinociception, while avoiding sedation. Antinociceptive effects do not confound psychological variables in the same universal way as sedation, and alone they do not represent a threat to validity. These effects do however disqualify any animal testing modality dependent on pain as a stimulus, such as in the Delaveau electrical stimulation research.

Recent research by Umezu et al. (2006) used the Gellar and Vogel conflict tests on mice. These tests are thought to measure anxiety. Safe and alarm periods are conditioned into eating behaviour of test subjects. A particular frequency of lever presses releasing food for the Geller, and licks of water for the Vogel, result in a shock during alarm periods. Safe period responses are not subject to shocks, and should not change despite the influence of an anxiety mediating agent. Umezu et al. utilised this to account for sedation, as higher concentrations of lavender oil resulted in decreased safe period responses, while lower doses increased alarm period responses. All but the highest concentrations did not affect safe period response frequency, ostensibly demonstrating significant anxiolytic effects through intraperitoneal administration. However, as lavender oil reduced pain from low doses (Barocelli et al., 2004), increased tolerance to the electric shock punishment confounds the observed alarm period increases in lever pressing and water licks. Analgesia systematically influences pain conditioned anxiety models, making them inappropriate for testing antinociceptive agents. Despite the empirical initiative of Umeza and the need for research isolating and testing the individual components of lavender oil, conflict models using pain are inappropriate for lavender. Nevertheless, this research serves as ideal example for methodically separating and assessing individual constituents.

The EPM is the superior design, being more interpretable than the OFT and more ecologically valid than conflict models (Flint, 2003). Apart from using conditioned responses over natural anxiety behaviours, the confound of analgesia and reliance on pain makes conflict models inappropriate for assessing the anxiolytic properties of lavender. However, the calibre of research produced by the EPM is immaterial if not supported in further lavender studies.

Future
------

Differences across animal species, compounded by uncertainty of the lavender sample used, separates the original research and makes it an inappropriate comparison to recent studies. Consequently, it is not empirically sound to make strong conclusions from Bradley et al. (in press), now an isolated and unreplicated piece of original research. Other key studies have either not focussed on lavender (Komiya et al., 2006) or not used the EPM (Shaw et al., in press) instead favouring what are arguably weaker anxiety testing paradigms.

Although a range of designs provides a more comprehensive understanding of the effects of lavender, the small number of lavender studies impedes the strength of conclusions. Future animal research would benefit most from large scale studies using the EPM and OFT, including a validated oil sample and diazepam condition. In addition, redesigning the conflict tests to use a conditioning stimulus unrelated to pain would validate their appropriateness as a measure. This would maximise the advantages of each design, and similarly minimise the inherent flaws. A combination of rats, mice, and Mongolian gerbils would identify whether sedatory and anxiolytic effects of lavender are species dependent. Given the breadth of conflicting results, such a study is necessary to isolate the precise effects of lavender.

Summary
-------

Although the bulk of animal studies are new and have some methodological flaws, future research can address these shortcomings. This is crucial, as direct research on human participants has had significantly more methodological difficulties, despite being the focus of research. Nevertheless, the clear trend across animal research is that lavender is capable of causing sedation, and potentially anxiolysis. This has been studied with multiple research designs, demonstrating an effect despite some conflicting results. Conclusions on animal mood states are dependent on their behaviour, and animal research has to generalise psychotropic properties from those observations rather than using a direct measure. With human research however, the psychotropic properties of lavender are easier to assess from self-report and more complex behavioural models.

Human Studies
=============

Behavioural research started broadly, working across different lavender species and reviewing multiple psychological effects. The early studies demonstrated that lavender exposure was associated with sedation and a decrease in cognitive aptitude, but did not isolate any direct non-sedatory anxiolytic effects (Ludvigson & Rottman, 1989). Potentially, the effects of lavender are so low that arousing negative attitudes towards the scent offset sedation or anxiolysis. This is supported by Ludvigson and Rottman, who used such high concentrations that participants found it unpleasant. They suggested that negative perceptions of the odour offset any measurable calming properties. Perceptual research supports this possibility, identifying that perceptions alone are sufficient to alter mood (Knasko, Gilbert, & Sabini, 1990). However, when researchers have attempted to subvert perception by keeping odour concentrations below the sensory threshold, performance has improved not decreased (Degel & Koster, 1999). Although researchers attributed this to reduced anxiety, this is not a direct measure, and the incongruence with prior research questions reliability.

Psychological Factors
---------------------

Human research on the psychological properties of lavender has paralleled animal research. Original studies on specific cognitive abilities achieved limited success in identifying the properties of lavender, but recent research has focussed on isolated mood states, producing significant results.

Early studies monitored both mood and cognitive skills. For example, Ludvigson and Rottmann (1989) found that lavender exposure decreased arithmetic abilities while clove did not, but this is less relevant than the absence of significant mood shifts. Participants endured two 25 minute cognitive assessments and where exposed to either lavender or clove. Being one of the first human inhalation studies, researchers lacked a standard concentration level and used abnormally high and uncomfortable amounts. The resulting negative participant response to the unpleasant odour confounds the results and enables few conclusions. The primary outcome of this study was increased emphasis on participant tolerability of lavender concentration. This apparent confound of odour pleasantness was addressed by Knasko (1992), where moderate levels of lavender were compared with lemon and dimethyl sulphide. Once again, no significant effects on mood where observed for lavender. The unpleasant smell of dimethyl sulphide did however negatively impact mood, suggesting that abnormally high concentrations of lavender may similarly depress affect. Indeed, perception influences human responses so strongly, the belief of an unpleasant odour being present is sufficient for participants to self-report ill-health symptoms (Knasko, et al., 1990).

Some early studies did show significant effects, but these were limited to very specific circumstances. Dunn, Sleep, & Collett (1999) conducted a large intervention of 122 intensive care patients, assessing physiological and psychological status for anxiety, mood, and coping. Participants were subject to either three sessions of normal massage, aromatherapy massage containing 1% L.vera oil, or 30 minutes of undisturbed rest. Only anxiety reduced significantly, observed exclusively in the first session for the aromatherapy massage and rest groups but not the standard massage group. The fragile nature of intensive care patients restricted lavender concentration to 1%, Dunn et al. suggesting higher concentrations would produce significant results. Additionally, constituent analysis of the lavender oil would be necessary, or substituted for validated oil such as L.angustifolia. Although the responses were brief, lavender still maintained a positive effect on the simplest emotions. By assessing immediate dermal responses in 15 participants, Vernet-Maury, Alaoui-Ismaili, Dittmar et al. (1999) connected the odour of lavender with 'happiness'. Autonomic nervous system responses, assessed through dermal measures such as blood flow, as well as other physiological responses such as heart rate and respiration, researchers found that lavender elicited happiness over other base emotions, such as sadness or disgust. At the very least, this demonstrates that the scent of lavender is not an inherently unpleasant and stimulatory odour.

While participants can perceive the lavender odour, the selected concentration along with participant interpretation confounds the results. In countering this, Degel and Koster (1999) dropped lavender and jasmine concentrations below the perceptual threshold of participants. Using a 45 minute arithmetic and concentration task, this study did not directly assess any psychological mood states. Although, the authors suggested that the significant reduction in errors observed from the lavender group were due to sedatory decreases in arousal. This is partially supported by Moss, Cook, Wesnes, and Duckett (2003), using deception to minimise expectancy effects rather than low concentrations. Moss et al., although yielding shifts in cognitive performance after lavender exposure, showed no shifts in calmness but significant decreases in alertness compared to rosemary odour and the no odour control. Authors suggested that the lack of reported calmness is potentially a result of conscious effort to countermand the sedatory effects of the lavender. This is a logical suggestion given the perceptual research, but not directly supported.

An important outcome of Degel and Koster is the suggestion that participants were not sufficiently stressed by the activities, and therefore no significant results would be found. Adding pre-stressing to the methodology of lavender experiments has been crucial in subsequent research. The most significant studies in new research include this element as an intrinsic element of their design. Lehrner, Marwinski, Lehr, et al. (2005) accomplished this, by comparing the anxiolytic properties of lavender odour with orange and music conditions in a dental office. The assumption of the research is that this is in an inherently stressful and anxiety causing environment, making it ideal to stress participants in an ethical and ecologically valid manner. Lehrner et al. revealed that a verified sample of lavender significantly improved mood, increased calmness and reduced state anxiety in a sample of 200 patients awaiting treatment. This study is currently the best evidence for the calming attributes of lavender noted in historical accounts and traditional knowledge systems.

Calming and anxiolytic effects have been the primary psychological mood states of research interest. In comparing the efficacy of L. angustifolia with imipramine in treating depression in 48 adult outpatients, Akhondzadeh, Kashani, Fotouhi, et al. (2003) expanded this narrow focus to severely depressed affect. Daily administration of the lavender as tincture drop, accompanied by placebo pill, significantly reduced depression over the four week trial. It did not decrease depression to the same extent as imipramine, but demonstrated comparable effects nonetheless. In the absence of a combined placebo tincture placebo pill condition, simply receiving treatment may account for observed decreases in depression. The final condition utilised the lavender tincture as an adjuvant therapy, administered in addition to imipramine. Depression decreased significantly more than for either treatment alone, Akhondzadeh et al. concluding that these results provide strong support for L. angustifolia as an adjuvant therapy for depression and recommending a large-scale formal trial. The absence of a double placebo condition, containing neither lavender nor imipramine, makes this proposal premature.

In light of the perceptual confounds unique to each individuals interpretation of lavender, future studies would need to focus on bringing out the underlying pharmacological mechanisms. It would also appear that the benefits of lavender are not invasive, and people are capable of overriding the sedatory or at least the calming properties. Long duration studies are necessary, detailing the progression from initial interpretation of the odour through to modification of both that interpretation and mood states, once the pharmacological mechanisms take effect.

Brain Patterns
--------------

Electrophysiological measurement provides an alternative to behavioural research, through a more objective examination of brain processes. Using an electroencephalogram (EEG), researchers identified a pattern called a contingent negative variation (CNV), a sharp change in human brain activity when expecting something to occur. Stimulatory odours increase the response, while sedatory odours decrease it. As lavender demonstrates a CNV depressing effect, Torii, Fukuda, Kanemoto, et al. (1988) showed the inhalation of lavender from filter paper had a sedatory effect on trained perfumery staff. Conversely, in replicating the results in participants without perfumery training, Lorig and Roberts (1990) disputed conclusions from Torii et al. Lorig and Roberts found that perception plays an integral role in both interpretation and brain response to odours. Through deception, participants expected to receive low levels of jasmine, lavender and galbanum, except there were no actual differences in odour. Without expectations, lavender produced the lowest CNV shift, and with the false expectation, there were no brain pattern differences and participants expressed dislike for the lavender. Lorig and Roberts highlight the effect of perception on odour response, and how often in human research, expectation effects surpass any direct physiological response. Other researchers found similar results (Gilbert, Knasko, & Sabini, 1997; Knasko, et al., 1990). In demonstrating these expectation mediated shifts in response, even in the absence of odour, these studies expose the significant methodological flaw that perception represents in odour research.

Despite vulnerability to expectations, EEG still provides valuable insight into the brain processes during olfactory stimulation. Diego, Jones, Field, et al. (1998) added to the research in finding spectra differences after lavender exposure comparatively to rosemary, ostensibly a stimulatory oil. The absence of a control group confounds analysis, but significant effects were observed regardless. Researchers found increased frontal a and b-2 waves post-exposure, a frequency commonly associated with drowsiness. Further, exposure decreased state anxiety scores, potentially accounting for an increase in math computation speed. This is in direct contrast to Masago, Matsuda, Kikuchi, et al. (2000), finding decreased a activity and relating it to positive and comfortable feelings. Furthermore, Masago et al. identified that participant interpretation of the odour significantly affects a activity shifts. Another conflicting study is Klemm, Lutes, Hendrix, et al. (1992), who instead found t wave increases, a pattern also suggested as representing drowsiness. Supporting Masago, Klemm et al. found high variability between the participants they observed, which suggested that individual interpretation confounds even objective EEG data.

Olfaction, in the absence of any underlying pharmacological mechanisms, affects EEG activity. A recent study from Field, Diego, Hernandez-Reif, et al. (2005), used inhalation of an artificial lavender fragrance gel. Despite producing similar increases in b power, the gel was devoid of the traditional oil constituents. Similar authors to Diego et al. (1998), these authors have modified their interpretation, now concluding this b power increase to denote increased cortical processing and stimulation. Nonetheless, participants still reported subjective and physiological relaxation from the odour alone, further emphasising the confound of perception on lavender induced anxiolysis. This does not suggest however, that olfactory perception accounts for all shifts in brain pattern. In comparing adults with infants, Sanders, Diego, Fernandez, et al. (2002), found significant shifts in EEG asymmetry between age groups. They suggest that higher levels of right frontal EEG activity denote depressed affect, with lavender odour decreasing this activity and benefitting participants. As infants responded to lavender similarly to adults, despite minimal knowledge and conditioning, authors conclude the infant results were due to a true effect of lavender. In general, these studies suggest a calming influence, yet the susceptibility of brain patterns to perceptual confounds invalidates EEG as a dependable measure if the odour is perceivable.

Clinical Applications
---------------------

Medical procedures understandably increase anxiety in people. Utilising the purported anxiolytic properties of lavender in clinical settings, research has attempted to determine whether it is effective in reducing procedural anxiety. Muzzarelli, Force, and Sebold (2006) exposed 118 patients to lavender odour, prior to receiving a colonoscopy or esophagogastroduodenoscopy. Researchers measured state anxiety before and after odour exposure leading up to the procedure. There were no significant differences between pre and post exposure anxiety. Reasons behind the lack of significant change are unclear, but overall participants felt that the odour was pleasant. In another clinical trial using a larger sample, Graham, Browne, Cox, and Graham (2003) exposed 313 radiotherapy patients to lavender odour during their radiation treatments. There were no significant differences in anxiety or depression for the lavender group. However, the carrier oil control group showed a significant decrease in anxiety after their radiotherapy. Lack of significance and confusing results suggest that there may be elements in clinical and hospital application that make lavender an ineffective anxiolytic agent. These null findings are to be expected when extending research to new samples, especially when participants are simultaneously receiving other treatments and medications.

Lavender may alleviate the withdrawal syndrome associated with alcohol and benzodiazepine dependency. The GABAergic (gamma-aminobutyric acid) mechanisms of lavender may potentially alleviate withdrawal symptoms from GABA mediated tranquilisers and alcohol dependence. Kunz, Schulz, Lewitzky, et al. (2007), used lavender as a control condition in assessing the efficacy of acupuncture in reducing symptoms from alcohol withdrawal. They found that lavender significantly decreased symptoms equal to acupuncture. Treatment of severe alcohol withdrawal requires GABA mediating tranquilisers, such as benzodiazepines. These utilise the identical GABAa receptors as lavender (Aoshima & Hamamoto, 1999; Johnston, 2005), making use of lavender as a benign control inappropriate. Although Kunz et al. concluded that acupuncture and aromatherapy are equally as effective in reducing withdrawal symptoms, underlying pharmacological mechanisms systematically influence the results. Despite not being the focus of the study, it may have uncovered the potential of lavender to reduce alcohol withdrawal symptoms, as opposed to acupuncture being an ineffective treatment. However, participants took benzodiazepine medications throughout the study. Apart from affecting the GABA mechanisms, lavender suppresses the hepatic enzymes modulating the concentration of these medications. This would suggest that while GABAergic mechanisms from the lavender influence withdrawal symptoms, the hepatic suppression of lavender could be increasing benzodiazepine concentrations also influencing symptoms. Conclusions are limited with this many pharmacological confounds, but Kunz nonetheless serves as a reference for future withdrawal research.

Hardy, Kirk-Smith, and Stretch (1995) assessed lavender odour as a sleep aid in withdrawing 4 psychogeriatrics from benzodiazepine and antipsychotic medication. Participants endured three phases of two weeks each, comprising of a baseline, a no medication period, and then a final phase of lavender exposure three times per night. Sleep significantly improved during the lavender exposure phase by returning to baseline levels pre-withdrawal, participants also demonstrating better waking moods without the residual daytime sedation of the medications. As two of the four participants where on addictive benzodiazepine medications, this level of sleep so quickly after withdrawal is extraordinary, and potentially due to the GABAergic mechanisms of lavender outlined above.

All clinical applications have shown noteworthy results, even if not significant either due to uncontrolled pharmacological confounds or small samples sizes. These confounds can be addressed by both examining the role of lavender with existing medication and the neurochemical mechanisms underlying mood states.

Pharmacological Mechanisms
==========================

The literature supports lavender as a sedative, and cautiously as an anxiolytic. These factors are not as prevalent in pharmacological research, the nature of the area presenting generally more replicable and specific results. Although only psychopharmacological and neuroanatomical relationships are relevant here, this area is constantly expanding, with lavender oil and the constituents therein demonstrating effects across the entire neurochemical body system.

Amygdala
--------

The amygdala is the neuroanatomical fear system in mammals, controlling the excitatory response and maintaining strong connections with anxiety (Kent, Mathew, & Gorman, 2002). Through the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA and excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate, the amygdala mediates arousal (Bergink, Megen, & Westenberg, 2004). To use this relationship, the GABA inhibitory role has been studied to produce benzodiazepines, the foremost tranquillising anxiolytic medication (Johnson, 2005). Through positive modulation, GABA affinity for the specific subtype receptor causing sedatory and anxiolytic effects is enhanced, the GABAa subtype receptor (Johnson, 1996). Likewise, research increasingly suggests relationships between glutamate and anxiety. Reducing glutamate activity cases anxiolytic effects, especially through blocking the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors (Bergink et al., 2004). Lavender acts on both systems, augmenting GABA to mediate calm and antagonising glutamate to reduce excitatory response.

Gamma-Aminobutyric Acid (GABA)
------------------------------

The underlying pharmacological properties of lavender have been isolated through animal studies. As reviewed previously, inhalation of lavender oil showed sedative effects in mice early in the century (Macht & Ting, 1921). This was attributed to a biochemical relationship after sedation was demonstrated through oral administration (Guillemain, et al., 1989). Buchbauer et al. (1991) returned to a mice aromatherapy model to replicate any sedatory effects, but in addition identified linalool and linalyl acetate in blood serum, the main constituents of many lavender species. Given the lipophilicity of these terpenoid components, it is not surprising they were found in rat cortex post inhalation, suggesting they crossed the blood brain barrier and directly influenced the CNS (Buchbauer et al., 1993). From this discovery, together with finding L. angustifolia reduced chemically and electrically induced convulsions, a GABAergic relationship was suggested (Yamada, Mimaki, & Sashida, 1994). This was isolated through research on the impact of different species and their constituents with Xenopus oocytes, showing that L.angustifolia augmented GABA-mediated synaptic inhibition by increasing GABA affinity for the GABAa receptor subtype (Aoshima & Hamamoto,1999; Hossain, Hamamoto, Aoshima, & Hara, 2004). This is the same mechanism used by benzodiazepines, corroborating sedative findings and legitimising anxiolytic potential (Johnston, 2005).

Glutamate
---------

The GABA relationship is the most studied for lavender, but the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate has also been implicated. Glutamate has many responsibilities, such as mediating cognition and memory, but primary roles relate to physiological activation in response to fear (Davis & Whalen, 2001). Linalool influences this system by delaying NMDA, retarding the amygdala from activating the body (Brum, Elisabetsky, & Souza, 2001; Elisabetsky, Marschner, & Souza, 1995). This fear mechanism is so necessary in arousal, that by blocking it with a more robust NMDA antagonist an organism can lose the ability to have fear conditioned (Simon & Gorman, 2006). Medications that utilise glutamate antagonists are still in pre-clinical stages, as higher doses inhibiting this mechanism produce psychotic symptoms as a side effect. Nevertheless, through this mechanism lavender may possess the potential to prevent anxiety, in conjunction with GABAergic manipulation to reduce anxiety. Regardless of the chemical and pharmacological properties of lavender, real-world relationships with anxiety require behavioural shifts in animals and humans.

Future Pharmacological Research
-------------------------------

Pharmacological research has improved understanding of the neurochemical mechanisms underlying lavender, opening new areas for human behavioural research. The pharmacodynamic resemblance of lavender to benzodiazepines warrants investigation for tolerance, dependence and withdrawal after long-term exposure. Tolerance and dependency to these medications restricts usage to two to four weeks only (National Health and Medical Research Council, 1991). Given the sensitivity of GABAergic manipulation, tolerance and dependency studies are necessary in revealing whether effects diminish or withdrawal follows protracted lavender use. As glutamate hypotheses are new, continued research with lavender may need yield valuable advances in the literature.

Conclusion
==========

Early animal studies had significant methodological shortcomings, which were corrected as the literature progressed. Despite using valid testing methods, modern studies are still too rare for reliable conclusions. These will potentially lead to consistent results in the future. Human studies have produced conflicting results since research begun. Similar to the animal studies, only recent research on human participants has produced meaningful and significant results. The strongest support for psychotropic properties comes from pharmacological analysis. By identifying psychotropic mechanisms rather than focussing on behaviour that reflects those mechanisms, it consistently and validly connected lavender to existing anxiolytic psychopharmacology. The extensive animal and human behavioural research supporting sedation, and recent studies showing anxiolysis, supports the psychotropic effects of lavender. However, the pharmacological mechanisms underlying lavender provide much stronger conclusions supporting psychotropic effects, over what is inconsistent and methodologically unsound behaviour research. Although the supported psychotropic composition of lavender seems to reduce the importance of behavioural studies, ultimately the pharmacological mechanisms are irrelevant if the behavioural effects cannot be demonstrated. Future research would benefit by further isolating the relevant pharmacological mechanisms, with ongoing human research to better identify the barriers to significant results and support the few existing studies.

References
==========

Akhondzadeh, S., Kashani, L., Fotouhi, A., Jarvandi, S., Mobaseri, M., Moin, M., et al. (2003). Comparison of Lavandula angustifolia Mill. tincture and imipramine in the treatment of mild to moderate depression: a double-blind, randomized trial. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry, 27(1), 123-127.

Aoshima, H., & Hamamoto, K. (1999). Potentiation of GABAA receptors expressed in Xenopus oocytes by perfume and phytoncid. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem, 63(4), 743-748.

Barocelli, E., Calcina, F., Chiavarini, M., Impicciatore, M., Bruni, R., Bianchi, A., et al. (2004). Antinociceptive and gastroprotective effects of inhaled and orally administered Lavandula hybrida Reverchon "Grosso" essential oil. Life Sci, 76(2), 213-223.

Bergink, V., van Megen, H. J., & Westenberg, H. G. (2004). Glutamate and anxiety. EurNeuropsychopharmacol, 14(3), 175-183.

Boelens, M. H. (1995). Chemical and sensory evaluation of Lavandula oils. Perf. Flav., 20, 23-51.

Bradley, B. F., Starkey, N. J., Brown, S. L., & Lea, R. W. (2006). Anxiolytic effects of Lavandula angustifolia odour on the Mongolian gerbil elevated plus maze. J Ethnopharmacol.

Brum, L. F., Elisabetsky, E., & Souza, D. (2001). Effects of linalool on [(3)H]MK801 and [(3)H] muscimol binding in mouse cortical membranes. Phytother Res, 15(5), 422-425.

Buchbauer, G., Jirovetz, L., Jager, W., Dietrich, H., & Plank, C. (1991). Aromatherapy: evidence for sedative effects of the essential oil of lavender after inhalation. Z Naturforsch [C], 46(11-12), 1067-1072.

Buchbauer, G., Jirovetz, L., Jager, W., Plank, C., & Dietrich, H. (1993). Fragrance compounds and essential oils with sedative effects upon inhalation. J Pharm Sci, 82(6), 660-664.

Davis, M., & Whalen, P. J. (2001). The amygdala: Vigilance and emotion. Mol Psychiatry, 6(1), 13-34.

Degel, J., & Koster, E. P. (1999). Odors: implicit memory and performance effects. ChemSenses, 24(3), 317-325.

Delaveau, P., Guillemain, J., Narcisse, G., & Rousseau, A. (1989). Neuro-depressive properties of essential oil of lavender. C R Seances Soc Biol Ses Fil, 183, 342-8.

Diego, M. A., Jones, N. A., Field, T., Hernandez-Reif, M., Schanberg, S., Kuhn, C., et al. (1998). Aromatherapy positively affects mood, EEG patterns of alertness and math computations. Int J Neurosci, 96(3-4), 217-224.

Dunn, C., Sleep, J., & Collett, D. (1995). Sensing an improvement: an experimental study to evaluate the use of aromatherapy, massage and periods of rest in an intensive care unit. J Adv Nurs, 21(1), 34-40.

Elisabetsky, E., Marschner, J., & Souza, D. O. (1995). Effects of Linalool on glutamatergic system in the rat cerebral cortex. Neurochem Res, 20(4), 461-465.

Field, T., Diego, M., Hernandez-Reif, M., Cisneros, W., Feijo, L., Vera, Y., et al. (2005). Lavender fragrance cleansing gel effects on relaxation. Int J Neurosci, 115(2), 207-222.

Flint, J., 2003. Animal models of anxiety and their molecular dissection. Seminars in Cell Developmental Biology 14, 37-42.

Gilbert, A. N., Knasko, S. C., & Sabini, J. (1997). Sex differences in task performance associated with attention to ambient odor. Arch Environ Health, 52(3), 195-199.

Graham, P. H., Browne, L., Cox, H., & Graham, J. (2003). Inhalation aromatherapy during radiotherapy: results of a placebo-controlled double-blind randomized trial. J Clin Oncol, 21(12), 2372-2376.

Guillemain, J., Rousseau, A., & Delaveau, P. (1989). [Neurodepressive effects of the essential oil of Lavandula angustifolia Mill]. Ann Pharm Fr, 47(6), 337-343.

Hardy, M., Kirk-Smith, M. D., & Stretch, D. D. (1995). Replacement of drug treatment for insomnia by ambient odour. Lancet, 346(8976), 701.

Hossain, S. J., Hamamoto, K., Aoshima, H., & Hara, Y. (2002). Effects of tea components on the response of GABA(A) receptors expressed in Xenopus Oocytes. J Agric Food Chem, 50(14), 3954-3960.

Jager, W., Buchbauer, G., Jirovetz, L., & Fritzer, M. (1992), Percutaneous absorption of lavender oil from a massage oil. J. Soc. Cosmet. Chem., 43, 49-54.

Jirovetz, L., Jager, W., Buchbauer, G., Nikiforov, A., & Raverdino, V. (1991). Investigations of animal blood samples after fragrance drug inhalation by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry with chemical ionization and selected ion monitoring. Biol Mass Spectrom, 20(12), 801-803.

Johnston, G.A.R. (2005). GABA(A) receptor channel pharmacology. Curr Pharm Des, 11(15), 1867-1885.

Johnston, G.A.R. (1996). GABAA receptor pharmacology. Pharmacol Ther, 69(3), 173-198.

Kent, J. M., Mathew, S. J., & Gorman, J. M. (2002). Molecular targets in the treatment of anxiety. Biol Psychiatry, 52(10), 1008-1030.

Klemm, W.R., Lutes, S.D., Hendrix, D.V., & Warrenburg, S. (1992) Topographical EEG maps of human responses to odors. Chem. Senses, 17, 347-61.

Knasko, S. C., Gilbert, A. N., & Sabini, J. (1990). Emotional state, physical well being, and performance in the presence of a feigned ambient odour. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 20(16), 1345-1357.

Knasko, S.C. (1992). Ambient odor's effect on creativity, mood, and perceived health. Chem. Senses, 17, 27-35.

Komiya, M., Takeuchi, T., & Harada, E. (2006). Lemon oil vapor causes an anti-stress effect via modulating the 5-HT and DA activities in mice. Behav Brain Res, 172(2), 240-249.

Kunz, S., Schulz, M., Lewitzky, M., Driessen, M., & Rau, H. (2007). Ear acupuncture for alcohol withdrawal in comparison with aromatherapy: a randomized-controlled trial. Alcohol Clin Exp Res, 31(3), 436-442.

Lehrner, J., Marwinski, G., Lehr, S., Johren, P., & Deecke, L. (2005). Ambient odors of orange and lavender reduce anxiety and improve mood in a dental office. Physiol Behav, 86(1-2), 92-95.

Ludvigson, H.W., & Rottmann, T.R. (1989). Effects of ambient odors of lavender and cloves on cognition, memory, affect and mood. Chem. Senses, 14, 525-36.

Macht, D. I. & Ting, G.C. (1921). Experimental inquiry into the sedative properties of some aromatic drugs and fumes. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Therap., 18, 361-72.

Masago, R., Matsuda, T., Kikuchi, Y., Miyazaki, Y., Iwanaga, K., Harada, H., et al. (2000). Effects of inhalation of essential oils on EEG activity and sensory evaluation. J Physiol Anthropol Appl Human Sci, 19(1), 35-42.

Moss, M., Cook, J., Wesnes, K., & Duckett, P. (2003). Aromas of rosemary and lavender essential oils differentially affect cognition and mood in healthy adults. Int J Neurosci, 113(1), 15-38.

Muzzarelli, L., Force, M., & Sebold, M. (2006). Aromatherapy and reducing preprocedural anxiety: A controlled prospective study. Gastroenterol Nurs, 29(6), 466-471.

National Health and Medical Research Council. (1991). Guidelines for the Prevention and Management of Benzodiazepine Dependence, 14. Canberra: AGPS.

Nelson, N. J. (1997). Scents or nonsense: aromatherapy's benefits still subject to debate. JNatl Cancer Inst, 89(18), 1334-1336.

Peana, A. T., D'Aquila, P. S., Chessa, M. L., Moretti, M. D., Serra, G., & Pippia, P. (2003). (-)-Linalool produces antinociception in two experimental models of pain. Eur J Pharmacol, 460(1), 37-41.

Umezu, T., Nagano, K., Ito, H., Kosakai, K., Sakaniwa, M., & Morita, M. (2006). Anticonflict effects of lavender oil and identification of its active constituents. Pharmacol Biochem Behav, 85(4), 713-721.

Sanders, C., Diego, M., Fernandez, M., Field, T., Hernandez-Reif, M., & Roca, A. (2002). EEG asymmetry responses to lavender and rosemary aromas in adults and infants. Int J Neurosci, 112(11), 1305-1320.

Shaw, D., Annett, J. M., Doherty, B., & Leslie, J. C. (2007). Anxiolytic effects of lavender oil inhalation on open-field behaviour in rats. Phytomedicine.

Shellie, R., Mondello, L., Marriott, P., & Dugo, G. (2002). Characterisation of lavender essential oils by using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry with correlation of linear retention indices and comparison with comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography. J Chromatogr A, 970(1-2), 225-234.

Simon, A. B., & Gorman, J. M. (2006). Advances in the treatment of anxiety: targeting glutamate. NeuroRx, 3(1), 57-68.

Tisserand, R. (1993). The art of aromatherapy. Essex, UK: C.W. Daniel Co. Vernet-Maury, E., Alaoui-Ismaili, O., Dittmar, A., Delhomme, G., & Chanel, J. (1999). Basic emotions induced by odorants: a new approach based on autonomic pattern results. J Auton Nerv Syst, 75(2-3), 176-183.

Yamada, K., Mimaki, Y., & Sashida, Y. (1994). Anticonvulsive effects of inhaling lavender oil vapour. Biol Pharm Bull, 17(2), 359-360.
